JUDY WOODRUFF: But first: how
a little-known program designed
to attract foreign investment
is increasingly under the
microscope, for economic
reasons and political ones.
Thousands of investors apply
and participate annually, and
one real estate business in
particular has put it back in
the spotlight in recent months:
the family of Jared Kushner,
the president's son-in-law.
Our economics reporter,
Paul Solman, has covered
the controversies around
the program before.
Here's his latest update.
It's part of our weekly
series Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: The soaring real
estate market in Jersey City,
New Jersey, due south of Wall
Street, a city becoming famous
for its many murals and its
wave of emigres from Manhattan
and Brooklyn fleeing
sky-high rents.
One neighborhood that's on the
rise, Journal Square, named
after the 150-year Journal News.
One of its latter-day
reporters, Terrence McDonald.
TERRENCE MCDONALD, The
Jersey Journal: This was
our old headquarters.
And Jared Kushner's
company bought that and
bought the office building
next door and bought
this whole vacant
lot right here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Jared Kushner
is, of course, President
Trump's son-in-law.
And what are they
going to build?
TERRENCE MCDONALD: The plan
is to build two towers on this
vacant lot and one tower across
the street, 72 stories,
mostly residential and also
commercial retail on the bottom.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, you may have
heard about this development
last month, when Jared Kushner's
sister pitched it to
investors in China.
MAN: CNN found out about this
event because of this ad.
It was actually posted
in the elevator of our
building here in Beijing.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, reporters
went, including CNN's Matt
Rivers, and most were promptly
shown the door, which only
provoked more coverage.
Why the selective secrecy?
For one thing, Nicole Kushner
Meyer may have thought twice
about the optics or my-optics
of trading on her family
connection to the president,
though Kushner companies later
said Meyer -- quote
-- "apologizes if that
mention of her brother
was in any way interpreted
as an attempt to lure
investors" -- unquote.
But also iffy, the investment
itself, criticized for selling
U.S. citizenship for cash, the
embattled EB-5 visa program, in
which foreigners who ante up a
million dollars to create 10
U.S. jobs are granted permanent
residency, and eventual U.S.
citizenship, for themselves
and for all immediate
family members under age 21.
Now, the Kushners, who declined
to comment for this story,
have used EB-5 investments
before, also here
in Jersey City.
JARED KUSHNER, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
As a company, we have
done a lot of projects,
but I have actually never
done a groundbreaking before.
PAUL SOLMAN: Fifty
million dollars of Chinese
cash for visas helped
build Trump Bay Street,
the president licensing his name
to his son-in-law's company, the
financing at below-market rates.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: This
is one of the newer luxury
high-rises here in Jersey City.
The highest price I saw
was on the 48th floor.
It's a 50-story building.
It was about $5,000 a month
for a two-bedroom/two-bathroom
apartment.
PAUL SOLMAN: Luxury apartments,
just a few minutes by
subway from Manhattan.
But, hey, Congress decided,
during a recession in 1990,
that a million dollars to create
10 jobs is a good deal
for the U.S. economy, no
matter what the project.
It turns out, however, that the
investors in Kushner's project
only had to put up $500,000,
half-price tickets to
citizenship for themselves
and their entire families,
thanks to a clause
that takes 50 percent off if you
create the jobs in a -- quote
-- "high-unemployment area"
- - unquote.
But wait a minute.
The unemployment rate around
Trump Bay Street was very low.
NORMAN ODER, Journalist:
There is an essential
dodge here going on.
There's something
really fake going on.
PAUL SOLMAN: Journalist Norman
Oder was the first to report on
the loophole that the Kushners,
and pretty much all urban
developers who use the
EB-5 program, exploit.
NORMAN ODER: EB-5 investments
are supposed to be a million
dollars unless it's in a rural
area or an area of
high unemployment.
That's called a targeted
employment area.
Then it's $500,000.
Guess what?
Every project is finagled
into a high-unemployment area.
PAUL SOLMAN: So
how do you do that?
NORMAN ODER: You have to
connect census tracts.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, let's walk
you through the process that
played out here in Jersey City.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're
about one mile away
from Trump Bay Street.
PAUL SOLMAN: But we're
still in the EB-5 district.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Yes, we are.
PAUL SOLMAN: EB-5 visa
investors can pay half-price
if they're investing in
an area with a jobless
rate one-and-a-half times
the national average.
I can see that we're
gradually getting into
dicier territory here.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're about
two miles away from Trump Bay
Street now in an area of the
city that has struggled
with violence and with
crime and with poverty.
PAUL SOLMAN: In 2014, when the
Kushners and their partners
were pitching Chinese visa
seekers, the national
unemployment rate was
just over 6 percent.
So now we're how far
away from downtown?
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're about
three, a little more than
three miles away from Trump Bay
Street now, on Ocean Avenue.
PAUL SOLMAN: And we're
in a substantially
worse neighborhood now.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Yes, yes,
businesses that are closed.
And this area does struggle
with violence even more than
the neighborhood we were just
in.
PAUL SOLMAN: We're walking
the so-called targeted
employment area the
developers created, with
an average jobless rate
of more than 9 percent.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: The
unemployment rate where
Trump Bay Street is,
about four miles away,
is so low that they have to
include a huge swathe of the
inner city and lower half of
the city to make the rate work.
PAUL SOLMAN: The only
requirement, the employment
area has to be made up
of neighborhoods that
border each other.
TERRENCE MCDONALD:
So, we're about at the
end of the line here.
That's Bayonne on the other
side of the train tracks.
PAUL SOLMAN: About five miles
and a whole lot of shoe leather
south of Trump Bay Street,
a gerrymandered, but legal
district made up of 16 different
census tracts, with an overall
unemployment rate of
9.8 percent, when the
national average was 6.
The claim is that Trump
Bay Street created
more than 1,280 jobs.
But did it actually help the
poor parts of town that made
its financing attractive?
So, you work in construction.
MAN: Absolutely.
PAUL SOLMAN: Did you try
to get a job downtown?
MAN: Several of us tried
to get a job downtown.
But they're not hiring us.
I don't know no one at all
who has no type of job from
downtown at Trump Towers or who
informed anyone
else about the jobs.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Do you
think that the construction
of these luxury high-rises
downtown has benefited
this area of the city at all?
MAN: No.
Look around.
People -- a lot of people
need help around here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Any of
the contractors you
know work downtown?
WOMAN: No.
No.
PAUL SOLMAN: You either?
WOMAN: No.
PAUL SOLMAN: What do you think
of the idea, though, of you
being included in this area
that then allows them
to get the foreign money
to build the towers?
WOMAN: I don't
think that's fair.
STEVEN FULOP, Mayor of
Jersey City, New Jersey:
The intention of the EB-5
program are to subsidize
areas in a city or community
that are lower-income,
in needs of jobs, and
don't have development.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not to subsidize
areas that don't need it, says
Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop.
STEVEN FULOP: The media scrutiny
on this stuff has brought a
lot of that to light, and there
will probably be policy changes
in Washington as a result of it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, there's
been legislation to try
to reform EB-5 for years.
STEVEN FULOP: I think now you're
in a unique moment in time
where there's more scrutiny
and more awareness around it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mayor Fulop, a
Democrat up for reelection
this fall, is also more aware.
The day after the story broke
about Nicole Kushner Meyer's
efforts in China, he withdrew
his support for a usually
standard 30-year tax abatement
and $30 million municipal bond
that the Kushners and their
partners had applied for to
build one Journal Square.
So, where's the mayor right now?
STEVEN FULOP: We're
not giving the subsidy.
We have clearly said that,
and they say they can't
move forward without it.
So we will see where
it goes from here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Where it's gone
is that, just yesterday, the
Kushner consortium withdrew
its tax break request.
According to the private company
helping raise $150 million
in EB-5 money, 6,600 new jobs
are now on hold.
But they would be in a
prospering part of town with
just a 4 percent jobless rate.
The poorer neighborhoods
to the south?
Their job was to boost the
average unemployment rate high
enough to qualify investors for
the half-price visas.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman reporting from Jersey
City.